Hey, PowerAppers, this is Brian Knight from Pragmatic Works, and in today's video, we're going to focus on how to get started with PowerPages. So stay tuned. Welcome back. PowerApps Portals is now PowerPages. It's not just a rebrand. It's also now showing the focus as part of the Power Platform on this portal technology also. So it's now a major tenant with Power BI, Power Virtual Agents, Power Automate, and Power Apps. Today's video is focused on how do you get started with the platform. Now that's not just a little rebrand of Power Apps portals, it's also a major new architecture shift on the product as well. And you're going to see how much different it is as opposed to what we had before also. We'll be creating a brand new video series on this in the future, but I wanted to create a video first on just how to get started with it and get your first PowerApp portal page open having some data showing and having a form showing. So let's begin. First of all, I went over to make.powerpages.com. That's where our equivalent on the PowerApps side of make.powerapps.com. To get started also, I went ahead and made sure I had some data out there, some tables and Dataverse. PowerApps portals requires Dataverse to make it happen. You can see my other videos about how to do that, but real briefly here, I went to make.powerapps.com. There we go. Make.powerapps.com went to my same environment that I'm in, in the PowerApps pages side, on the PowerPages page side, too many power words here, and I created a really quick table or two to store my data. In my example, I'm storing a project management system where I'll have projects and I'll have bids on those projects. So I have, in my case, a table called Projects, and a table called Vendors, and one called Proposals. So I'm going to create a really quick application, which you're seeing right here, where my vendors can bid on certain projects. We'll have more on that when we do our series, as we go deeper into the product. But to start with, let's go over to Power Pages, and we can create a brand new site. Now I've created a few here already that we can kind of look at in a moment here, but when I hit Create Site, the first question it's going to ask is, me is what template do I want to use? Already, you can see the vast difference between this product and PowerApps portals. So I could select the default template, which is pretty darn nice. There's also templates for doing things like after-school registrations. You have one for scheduling a meeting, which is a pretty slick template. And then one's for a new employee onboarding process. What they try to do is take the common scenarios around the industry of how people are using PowerApps portals. and transfer it automatically into PowerPages. So, if I select one of my templates here, I'll just pick this after school program for example, I'll hit choose template, then it's going to do some checks and verification on permissions, and after that you give it a name, and you give it a URL, and then you'll hit create. It'll also take a few seconds to kind of do its thing here. A few things to note, the first time you do this, it might take up to 45 minutes for it to create the site. When it's all done, you just give it a good name here, give it a URL at the bottom. Another note here is now in PowerPages, you can have multiple sites in a given environment also. So it makes it super easy to kind of build that out. So when I hit done, I'll get an email about, for my second portal maybe a few minutes later, my first portal in a certain environment, it might take 45 minutes or so to get the first email. You'll get an email that looks like this to build out your site. So I have a brand new site already made and I want to make you guys wait for me to do that. And if I go back to go back a few times here. Okay here we go. Here I'll just go back to the main URL here. This is a preview product. So some of the navigation is a little awkward right now. Like how do I get back and forth here. But it's kind of keep me in my line of creating a site. All right. Once I've done that you'll see my site right here. Again the site I just created about 10 minutes ago. Then we can either preview the site or we can edit the site. Let's go ahead and edit the site now. You'll immediately see how much different this is over Power Apps portals in case you've watched the previous videos. First of all, it kind of feels a little bit WordPress-y, right? So as you go through, you get a plus button that will ask you what kind of element do you want to put in. In my case, I'm going to create a brand new page. So on the left side here, it has navigation. You'll see a little plus button. to get part of my navigation or not paid a part to get part of my navigation I'm gonna choose to make mine part of it and I'll call this a project bid this like that you get a number of templates that you have I'll go ahead and start over your page here and hit add and so we can kind of see what this is going to look like in a few minutes it'll quit a few seconds it'll go and create that page and allow you to go ahead and interact with it there are a lot more controls you have inside of the power power pages platform you'll notice I get some good templates here and I can go ahead and modify this or I could have created just a blank page also. It's trying to use a template here that you can use. On the left side you'll also see things like styling where you can kind of change the color to the site, change your header ones, so much easier than it used to be but if I want to make all my header ones that color there they immediately all reflect that also after I save changes of course. You also have a number of templates you can use as well or you can upload your own CSS if you wanted to. You also now have the ability to see your data. So I can go ahead and easily see different types of data right here. I can add a new table by hitting the plus button and modify my table. Traditionally, you'd have to hop around different screens and you might still find yourself hopping around some screens. But all in all, being able to create tables is a big change here. A few notes around creating tables here. I would not recommend you create tables here, but I would recommend you modify those tables. The reason why is it's not going to create these tables. in a solution. If you don't know what solutions are yet, no worries, just go back and watch my previous videos or follow up next week and you'll see the video series where I kind of go through all the steps of doing this, including creating a solution. Also, after we have that, we also have some set up steps we can do. We could turn on like what providers that we want to use again. That would have been another screen. The previous enter. We have our table permissions, another screen that had a previous application, and then these are other screens right now, but they'll also bring these and I'm sure eventually all. Awesome. So let's go back to our pages here. So we have our page. I'm going to hit the plus button here and I'm going to create a new one column section. There we go. And it's mainly asking here. Do you want to put things like Power BI reports in here or a list or form. You have videos. So it's making a very easy interactive experience right now. In my case I want to put a list of data inside of here. So it's asking now what kind of data do you want to do. Traditionally this would have been a lot more work. But I want to go ahead and go against my. proposal table. The proposal table shows all the bids that you may have made. And then what do you want to put in there? So I'll go ahead and put the active proposals. These are the active proposals for a given client. And then I'll hit OK. Now I'm not quite done yet. You'll see my data right here. Now I can always go back to that list properties by hitting the list button again. And then you can see things like your data. Do you want to allow people to create records here? Do you want them to edit records? And so on and so on. I'll say yeah you can delete but not anything else for the time being at least under settings we can also turn on searchability and other things like that as well. There are also a ton of other properties you can get to you can get those properties by going to portal management application. So you'll see those will cover that later but you'll see those that poor application is going to be under data and you'll hit that portal management app right here to get to the other more advanced properties. So here's my list of data. Now at this point I can now preview this. It'll ask me if you want to preview this mobilely, scan out my phone, or use my desktop. Every time you make a change in a Power App portal, you need to flush the cache and reload the cache. So to do that, one way of doing that is to re-browse a portal each time. That will flush and load, and then you're getting a list like this. Now one thing you'll notice here is I don't have permissions to see those records right now. So I want to go ahead and fix that next. Now in my case, my table is missing. who is actually making a bid on this. So I'm going to hop back over to my solution back in PowerApps, where I created this table. But I would traditionally go over here, look for my solution. There it is, Project Management. And then I would add a new column right here, after I found my table. So my table is Proposal, and then I would add a new column right here. Now, that's one way of doing it. Let's see how we can do it in PowerApps Portals. Well, I know I need a new column, where I store who is making the bid. So if I go over to my data table here we can see the proposal column table is already in here where I can click on it and you'll notice I can actually hit new column right from here. Awesome. It was a big big change just from having to be able to do that now. I can then call this just maybe the person, the applicant maybe I'll call this, the person that's doing the proposal. And you can see I can make it a lookup, lookup against the contact table. The contact table is going to hold all of my. usernames, but it's also going to hold things like who actually is making a proposal, and those types of things. So contact table is used to hold any kind of person information inside it. So as I scroll down here, I'll look for contact. There we go. Alright, so what it's saying is the applicant is going to be a lookup against my contact table. Again, all of my users are in that contact table as well as any other people I might be doing in PowerApps as well. Alright, so once I hit save, it's going to... and save that record, or that column, excuse me, and we'll see I have a whole bunch of columns. Now I can actually build some security on that table. But the cool thing is, I didn't have to leave this environment. All my changes can happen in here. If you've seen my other previous classes and other videos on YouTube on PowerApps portals, you have to hop around quite a bit to accomplish your goal. Here, everything is done in pretty much one interface. There'll be some other interface you have to go to for more advanced things. But even that could potentially change down the route. Alright, so once I have this done, I'll go back to my page that I created earlier. Okay, there's my list right here. Alright, pulled it up. I'll go over to my permissions for this given list. Now, when I set the permissions here, it's also going to set it for every individual, any page that happens to be using this table here as well. So you'll set the permissions one time, saying who can see the data in that table. So I'll click on... new permission and I'll just call this how we call it contact dash. This is for proposals. All right my tables proposals already filled that in now global access means that you as an individual or the user can see all data. As long as you have a certain security role contact access. You can only see data that you created account level access. You can see there that you created as well as anybody else has associated with your company. And we And lastly, self-access is where you can see your own profile. In my case, I'm going to do a contact-level access. It will ask me the relationship. I've got a relationship we just created. This is the relationship between the proposal and the contact. This is the one we just created called Applicant a moment ago. And I'm going to let you do everything with that record. We'll cover more about this in our video series. Last, I'm going to hit Add Role, and I'll say anybody that's authenticated can do a proposal. Next I'll hit save and now as an end user I should be able to see this data. I can do that hitting hitting preview and do desktop again and let's see do I still get the error. Now chances are well not chances are I'm definitely I should have permissions to see it but I won't have any data. There we go. OK. You don't have permission to see the data still. All right. Let's take a look at what's going on there. I save it. I did save it. Oh I know the problem. Okay. My next challenge is I'm not associated to any given role. I'm unauthenticated right now. I'm John Doe, essentially. So let me go back over here again. Let me go back to my portal here. And I'm going to go ahead and sign in. If I can find my portal. There we go. I'm going to go ahead and sign in and start to authenticate in. That's why I don't have permissions. We also could have hidden that page so you couldn't even see that page unless you had rights. I'm going to do Azure AD to sign in. And the first time I sign in, it's going to request control. and ask for permissions to do this. Now this is not first time per user, this is first time anybody signs in to the portal. So when I do that, it's basically creating an app registration inside of Azure to allow me to read the Active Directory. You can also do that for things like Facebook and LinkedIn, there's a whole bunch of different providers out there. The first time you sign in, it does take a few seconds, but now that I've done it, you'll see I basically have a record, I can go now over to project. and I should not get the same error. I should get zero records to work with. Now, we can also in Power Apps portals, or sorry, Power Pages, go through and specify what language does Brian speak and show certain things for him. All right, so I go back over here again to my Power Page, just to show you what you can do here. If I hit my little three dot next to this page and go to Page Settings, we can also go through, oops, sorry, let me go back there one more time. All right, we can also go through and do things like. on that page. I must have it somewhere else now. Or we can secure that page as well. Alright, so now that we have our list of projects we're now ready to go ahead and add a way to enter a new project. So I'm going to hit the plus button and I'm going to add a new section. There we go. New one column section. I'm going to add a form in here to enter a new area here. There we go. I'll go ahead and do a new form. This form is going to be called. my proposal table. There we go. It's gonna ask which form I want to go with. I have some other forms. I have an information form right now. We're gonna go with that for the time being. It's not the prettiest form, but it's gonna have to do for the time being. It's gonna have a lot of extra junk in there also that we don't really care about. Alright, so we're gonna name our form. We'll call this just proposal form. If we go over to data we can go back and actually see the data that's going to create a new record or is a read-only form or is an update. On submit, what do we want to happen? Do you want to go to a new page? Do you want to send an informational message? And my most favorite here is to kill the capture part, and then we'll hit OK. Now, once we do that, we'll see our form in a moment here. Again, we have permissions to it, so we'll see this, but we're missing a few things. We're missing the contact here. So if I select this form and hit Edit Fields, it basically will open up the form here. and I can go ahead and modify that to my own liking. Occasionally, you'll get some errors like this, because they are, this is a preview environment here. It's gonna open it up again. So for the time being, I'm gonna open up this form in the good old fashioned solution I created earlier. But in a moment here, let's see if it'll actually come up. Yeah, it's having a little issue there today. All right, no problem, hit the back button, just kind of forgo that here. All right, so, and again, it is preview, so we'll occasionally get that. So. I'm going to go back over to my environment here. This is my proposal table. Guys, open a solution up instead. Same exact concept here, just a little bit different. The same interface here. I'll go to my forms. I'm going to go ahead and hit the main form here, where I'm going to modify this. I'm going to do a save as and create a special portal form for this instead. So I'm going to open this up. We'll see it opens up the environment. I'll go to my ABC. I will then add, I think it's called applicants. There we go. Applicant is now there. Okay. I'm going to kill my timeline here on the right side. And I'll also make this all one column so it fits better in the screen. And then I'll do a Save As. And I'll call this just Portal Form for Proposals. OK, good enough. And then I'll publish this also. Now, this is actually a good example of one of the things that can go wrong occasionally. If you were to do something outside the environment, like I'm doing right now, outside of Power Pages, we need to bring. this new metadata, this new configuration, over to the designer interface that we had open a moment ago. So if I go back over here again and just hit back a few times, hopefully it'll wake up. There we go. And I'll go back to my project bids here. So I've made a critical change. It does not know that I've created a new form that I want to use here. To bring that new configuration over, I'll hit sync. That will then bring over all the latest metadata into this environment. As soon as I do that, I should be able to see that new form that I created. So if I go over to my form down here, select form, I can then change my form right here from information to portal form for proposals. If I had not done sync, I would not see this option right here. That's kind of why I did that. And now when I hit okay, this timeline should go away hopefully. There it goes. It becomes one column. I got some extra junk in here.  fix eventually. But then I've got my vendor and my applicant now here. Alright, there's a few more little permissions problems I'm going to have here, but I want to show you what those problems may look like. I'll hit preview, where it's going to, again, re-cache everything. Alright, give it a few seconds here. Alright, it's refreshing. Now the authenticated users role that I made writes to this, essentially says anybody that's authenticated. that's right to do this. So now that I have this, let me show you one of the problems we're gonna have. So we have these items right here. We can also alter these later down the road. You'll notice like right now, I have no permissions to see the projects that I'm bidding on. I also have no permissions to see my own record right now in the contact table. So we wanna go ahead and fix those two pieces. I'm gonna ignore the vendor one for the time being. But I'm gonna try to fix my project new and my applicant next. So really simple, it comes down to this. the permissions right so if I go back over to my table here you'll see over here under setup you'll see permissions right there and I need to add two permission sets one is for me to see my own record so if I go over here and call the call this con self contact okay I'm using that that kind of crib notes there for myself so I know that I could tell what type of permission it is without seeing the checkboxes going to be self-permission, meaning I can see my own record, and I'm gonna allow myself to create, well this is my own record, so I'm gonna allow myself to do pretty much everything. Really, all I need really is read rights, but let me go ahead and just keep that simple. I'm gonna need a read and a pin and a pin to. I'm gonna go ahead and add a role for anybody that's authenticated can see their own record. I'll save that, and the other one I want to be able to see is the projects. Okay, so I'll go ahead and hit new permission. This time, I want you to have read access and append and append to to all projects. So I'll call this global-projects. My table is projects. There we go. Project, excuse me. I'm just going to be global access when you can see all records. And I'll do read, append, and append to. Append and append to essentially means that you're able to relate to that project also. So that lookup column I have will allow you to do that. Authenticate users, hit save, and there we go. And then there we go. So we have our two pieces now ready to go. And let's go ahead and preview the application. So let me go back to my page again. Find my page. There's my page right here. And then I'll hit the preview button. Now I still don't have it working for accounts. That's absolutely fine. We'll leave that off the piece right here. And we'll use that more in our advanced videos where we do a step-by-step kind of process through the portal. All right. So notice we don't have any records right now. Nothing in my sleeves. We're going to go ahead and add a project here. You can see it's been submitted here we can also of course we want to remove this column normally we'll go ahead and pick a project Brian's new Lambo of course that's fictional and we'll hit the applicant it saw myself Brian Knight we can also default that to my name and we'll show you more than that in our video series following this video starting next week our vendor still does not have a vendor but it's fine we'll hit submit we of course can remove this section down here and there is my project so There's my proposal, excuse me, and you can also delete that proposal doing what we just did earlier. We toggled that one switch. So in this video, we walked you through creating the site, creating your list, also creating the form to enter the data, and the security permissions around that. We'll follow this up with a video series, one video a week, on step-by-step through creating the entire solution as well. This is some of the training we do at Pragmatic Works. You can find that training at PragmaticWorks.com. You can find those links down below in the description of this video. Good luck on creating your first PowerApp portal, and thanks for watching this video today. If you care about more videos like this, please do subscribe and hit that bell so you can find out when we release our series on PowerPages. Thank you so much.